BGP and states.txt 


- Idle, Connect, Active, Opensent, Openconfirm, Established.
IDLE - Router is searching routing table to see whether a route exists to reach the neighbor.
CONNECT - Router found a route to the neighbor and has completed the three-way TCP handshake.
OPEN SENT - Open message sent, with parameters for the BGP session.
OPEN CONFIRM - Router received agreement on the parameters for establishing session.
ACTIVE - Router didn't receive agreement on parameters of establishment.
ESTABLISHED - Peering is established; routing begins.



Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is a standardized exterior gateway protocol designed to exchange routing and reachability information among autonomous systems (AS) on the Internet.The protocol is often classified as a path vector protocol but is sometimes also classed as a distance-vector routing protocol. 

The Border Gateway Protocol makes routing decisions based on paths, network policies, or rule-sets configured by a network administrator and is involved in making core routing decisions.

BGP may be used for routing within an autonomous system. In this application it is referred to as Interior Border Gateway Protocol, Internal BGP, or iBGP. In contrast, the Internet application of the protocol may be referred to as Exterior Border Gateway Protocol, External BGP, or EBGP.


BGP basics

The current version of BGP is BGP version 4, based on RFC4271.
BGP is the path-vector protocol that provides routing information for autonomous systems on the Internet via its AS-Path attribute.
BGP is a Layer 4 protocol that sits on top of TCP. It is much simpler than OSPF, because it doesn’t have to worry about the things TCP will handle.
Peers that have been manually configured to exchange routing information will form a TCP connection and begin speaking BGP. There is no discovery in BGP.
Medium-sized businesses usually get into BGP for the purpose of true multi-homing for their entire network.
An important aspect of BGP is that the AS-Path itself is an anti-loop mechanism. Routers will not import any routes that contain themselves in the AS-Path.