recover login password.txt

1. Changing Your Windows 8 or 10 Password Online
2. Changing Your Windows 8 or 10 Password in Safe Mode
    1/
    Restart the computer from the login screen.[2] This restart is a little different than the kind you normally perform. Boot to the login screen, then click the Power icon. Hold down the ⇧ Shift key on the keyboard as you click “Restart.” This is the first of two restarts you’ll perform in order to boot into Safe Mode.
    2/
    Choose a restart option. Once the computer restarts, you’ll be brought to a screen that says “Choose an option.” Click “Troubleshoot,” then “Advanced Options,” then “Startup Settings.” Click “Restart” to boot the machine into a new option screen.
    3/
    Press 4 or F4 to enter Safe Mode. The exact key to press varies among computers. The computer will now boot to a Safe Mode login screen.
    4/
    Log in as the built-in Administrator. Click the arrow icon to choose the account called “Administrator.” You will not need to enter a password.
    5
    Open the User Accounts Control Panel. Press ⊞ Win+X, click “Control Panel,” then “User Accounts.”
    6
    Click “Manage Another Account.” In the list of accounts, choose the user account whose password you need to reset.
    7
    Click “Change Password.” Now you can reset the password for your regular username. You’ll need to type it twice in order to confirm it, then click “Save.”
    8
    Restart the computer. Press Ctrl+Alt+Del, then click the Power icon, then “Restart.” When the computer boots back up, it will do so normally, and you’ll be able to log in with your regular username and the new password you created.

3. Resetting Your Windows Password with a Password Reset Disc
   Choose “Command Prompt” from the menu. This will launch a black window with a prompt where you will type all of the following commands to rename some files:
    Type C: or D: (the drive letter you made note of earlier) and press ↵ Enter
    Type windows\system32 and press ↵ Enter
    Type ren utilman.exe utilhold.exe and press ↵ Enter
    Type copy cmd.exe utilman.exe and press ↵ Enter
    Type exit and press ↵ Enter

    Set a new password. Type net user yourusername yournewpassword, but replace “yourusername” with your username and “yournewpassword” with a new password. Type exit to close the command prompt.

    Type the following commands into the command prompt. Now you’ll undo the file renaming you a little while ago.
    Type C: (or whichever drive letter you made note of earlier) and press ↵ Enter.
    Type cd windows\system32 and press ↵ Enter
    Type copy utilhold.exe utilman.exe and press ↵ Enter
    Type exit and press ↵ Enter.